6092

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 43, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2025

Deep Learning for Detection of Harmful Events in Real-World, Noisy Optical Fiber Deployments
Leyla Sadighi , Member, IEEE, Stefan Karlsson, Member, IEEE, Carlos Natalino , Member, IEEE, Lena Wosinska , Senior Member, IEEE, Marco Ruffini , Senior Member, IEEE, and Marija Furdek , Senior Member, IEEE
(Invited Paper)

Abstract--Optical network infrastructure underpins global communication networks. It is exposed to various physical layer breaches, such as fiber cuts or eavesdropping via fiber bending, that may violate privacy or disrupt services. Analyses of State of Polarization (SOP) variations induced by external events, combined with Machine Learning (ML) techniques, can contribute to early identification of events and categorization of potential threats. However, real-world deployment of automated threat detection and mitigation faces many challenges, including the inconsistencies between controlled laboratory settings, often used for dataset collection for ML training, and real-world, noisy environments. In this paper, we study the detection of external disturbances in real-world fiber installations by analyzing the induced changes in the SOP of optical signals. We develop a suite of Deep Learning (DL) models, including One-Dimension (1D) Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and fully-connected dense layers, for the detection of harmful events in noisy environments comprising a shorter (300 m) and a longer (21 km) fiber link installation, corresponding to Fiber to the Home (FTTH) and metro-scale optical paths, respectively. The proposed approach employs an optical analyzer to capture SOP changes resulting from mechanical or acoustic vibrations, as well as eavesdropping attempts. Upon careful tuning of the DL models' hyper-parameters, 98.57% accuracy is obtained for the shorter, and 92.26% for the longer link installation.
Index Terms--Communication system security, convolutional neural network (CNN), deep learning (DL), fiber bending, fiberoptic networks, machine learning (ML), optical polarization, physical layer security, stokes parameters, vibrations.
Received 20 December 2024; revised 6 March 2025 and 29 March 2025; accepted 1 April 2025. Date of publication 3 April 2025; date of current version 4 July 2025. This work was supported in part by Swedish Research Council under Grant 2023­05249, in part by European Commission's Digital Europe Programme through the 5G-TACTIC Project under Grant 101127973, in part by European Union's Horizon Europe research and innovation program through the ECO-eNET Project under Grant 10113933, and in part by Taighde Éireann ­ Research Ireland under Grant 18/RI/5721: OpenIreland Research Infrastructure. (Corresponding author: Leyla Sadighi.)
Leyla Sadighi, Carlos Natalino, Lena Wosinska, and Marija Furdek are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, 412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden (e-mail: sadighi@chalmers.se; carlos.natalino@ chalmers.se; wosinska@chalmers.se; furdek@chalmers.se).
Stefan Karlsson is with the Swedish Defense Material Administration, 115 88 Stockholm, Sweden (e-mail: stefan.karlsson@fmv.se).
Marco Ruffini is with the Department of Computer Science and Statistics, Trinity College Dublin, D02 PN40 2 Dublin, Ireland (e-mail: marco. ruffini@tcd.ie).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https://doi.org/10.1109/JLT.2025.3557748.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JLT.2025.3557748

I. INTRODUCTION
O PTICAL fibers are critical to global communication infrastructure. For example, by 2021, over 43% of U.S. and 60% of Canadian households had access to an optical fiber network, reflecting an annual growth rate of 12% [1]. In Sweden, fiber internet penetration has also grown significantly over the past decade, reaching approximately 82.6% of households in 2020, up from 33% in 2010 [2]. This extensive reach underscores the importance of fiber-optic networks, not only in connecting individual households but also in forming the backbone of national and international communication systems. The backbone is the most critical part of the infrastructure, as it interconnects various regions and countries [3], ensuring that data can flow seamlessly across vast distances. Disruptions or breaches in this segment can have widespread effects, impacting numerous users and services simultaneously. Therefore, secure and resilient optical network transmission is of primary concern, where the rippling effects of interruptions or breaches at the physical layer can disrupt a multitude of upper-layer services. Optical fibers are vulnerable to physical tampering, particularly from human activities such as construction, which can compromise network integrity and lead to issues such as fiber cuts. In addition, fiber optic networks are vulnerable to security threats from eavesdropping techniques such as evanescent coupling and fiber bending [4], [5]. These techniques enable attackers to covertly intercept data transmissions without noticeable disruptions to network performance, thereby jeopardizing confidentiality, integrity, and privacy of transmitted information. To address these vulnerabilities, comprehensive monitoring of events that can compromise optical networks--whether caused by human activity or environmental factors--is essential for enhancing network resilience and minimizing the data, financial, or reputational losses caused by disruptions in telecommunication services [6].
To exploit the potential of optical fiber as an environmental sensor and address the diverse monitoring demands of modern optical networks, various fiber-optic sensing methodologies have been developed. While traditional sensing techniques, such as optical interferometry [7], offer high sensitivity with sub-nanometer spatial resolution and precise phase shift detection [8], [9], their reliance on ultra-stable laser sources or specialized hardware limits their practicality in large-scale

© 2025 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

SADIGHI et al.: DEEP LEARNING FOR DETECTION OF HARMFUL EVENTS IN REAL-WORLD, NOISY OPTICAL FIBER DEPLOYMENTS

6093

deployments. Similarly, Optical Time Domain Reflectometry (OTDR) [10], [11] and its coherent counterpart [12] provide robust fault localization but exhibit trade-offs between simplicity, accuracy, and the added complexity and cost of coherent systems. Distributed Acoustic Sensing (DAS) [13], [14] offers higher sensitivity and finer spatial resolution for detecting vibrations and mechanical disturbances compared to traditional fiber sensing techniques like OTDR and interferometric methods [15], [16]. This capability allows DAS to detect subtle environmental changes along the fiber with high accuracy. However, traditional DAS implementations often depend on expensive, highpower interrogators and were typically deployed on dedicated dark fibers, which precluded simultaneous data transmission and presented significant financial and operational barriers to widespread adoption. Recent advancements, such as L-band DAS systems, have enabled the co-propagation of sensing and data signals over the same fiber without significant interference, thereby enhancing scalability and cost-effectiveness [17], [18]. Nonetheless, the need persists for more scalable and cost-effective fiber-optic sensing solutions that can seamlessly integrate with existing telecommunications infrastructure.
SOP sensing emerges as a transformative approach for addressing the limitations of existing fiber sensing technologies [19]. This approach involves tracking of the Stokes parameters of light, a four-dimensional vector (S = [S0, S1, S2, S3]) that defines its polarization state over time [20]. Unlike DAS and OTDR-based methods that require costly hardware, dedicated resources, or complex configurations, SOP-based sensing leverages the intrinsic capabilities of carrier-grade coherent optical transceivers, which are designed to meet stringent reliability, performance, and interoperability standards required in commercial telecommunication networks. These transceivers measure SOP as part of their Digital Signal Processing (DSP) for data demodulation, enabling seamless integration of sensing functions into live, traffic-carrying optical fibers [21]. This scalability allows for the accurate monitoring of environmental and mechanical disturbances over extensive distances, making SOP sensing a practical option for addressing the operational and economic constraints of modern optical networks. By utilizing standard network hardware, SOP-based sensing provides a technically viable solution for integrating monitoring capabilities into existing systems without requiring significant additional infrastructure.
To fully leverage SOP sensing in fiber-optic monitoring, advanced data processing is vital to extract useful patterns from complex polarization fluctuations. The evolving threats to transmission systems may appear as events at various frequencies or frequency bands, inducing diverse effects on the SOP variations. Traditional monitoring systems that rely on predefined rules and thresholds often struggle to adapt to these complex and dynamic SOP variations [22]. This is due to the dependence of such systems on manual rule creation and maintenance, which makes them less effective in dynamic environments. To address these challenges, integrating ML techniques into monitoring systems offers a more adaptive and robust solution. ML models can automatically learn to identify intricate patterns

in SOP variations from the data, without the need for manual rule definition. This capability enhances the system's ability to detect and classify disturbances, even as threats evolve. ML, and Supervised Learning (SL) in particular, play a critical role by using labeled datasets to train models and achieve accurate classification of disturbances. Traditional SL methods, such as those based on gradient boosting or support vector machine, have been widely employed in the literature to identify and classify different types of tampering and natural disasters over experimental testbeds [23], [24], [25] due to their simplicity and effectiveness in low-dimensional feature spaces.
DL models stand out due to their ability to effectively process complex and high-dimensional datasets, which is a characteristic of SOP data. Several studies have explored the application of DL models, including Deep Neural Networks (DNN) and CNN, for event classification of OTDR traces data [26], [27]. The work in [28] presented a CNN-based approach for detecting and localizing reflective events in the presence of noisy OTDR data. These DL models are implemented over OTDR data, relying on expensive and specialized hardware to measure backscattered light and detect changes in the optical signal. In our study, we address this limitation by utilizing SOP variation data, which monitors temporal variations in the polarization state, providing complementary information on fiber disturbances without relying on backscattered signal analysis or requiring specialized measurement equipment. To effectively address the added complexity from environmental noise, we implement a combination of 1D convolutional and fully-connected dense layers for accurate event classification.
This paper extends our previous work in [29]. Therein, we analyzed SOP variations data for seven different types of events over the same testbed considering two separate installations with transmission lengths of 0.15 km (shorter link) and 10.5 km (longer link) in each direction, respectively. Using an SL technique called Histogram Gradient Boosting (HGB), we achieved an accuracy of 86.5% in event detection and categorization through SOP variation analysis. This result demonstrated that, while the considered ML model achieved reasonable accuracy, its performance was far from that expected for use in production deployments. Building on this foundation, the present study explores the performance of the DL models and focuses on the relationship between the complexity of the model, measured by the number of trainable parameters, and accuracy. Additionally, we expand the scope of collected events to include eavesdropping and combinations of eavesdropping with different types of vibrations specifically for the long-link installation, which have not been previously investigated in noisy environments.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section II details the considered DL-based framework used for SOP analysis. Section III describes the experimental setup and the data collection process for generating polarization signatures under various conditions. Section IV details the employed DL models, focusing on the main architecture and hyper-parameter tuning. Section V analyzes the experimental results, and Section VI concludes the paper.

6094

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 43, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2025

Fig. 1. Architecture envisioned for the DL-based analysis of SOP data.

II. DEEP LEARNING-BASED ANALYSIS OF STATE OF POLARIZATION DATA
In this work, we consider a Software-Defined Networking (SDN) scenario, illustrated in Fig. 1, where devices form the data plane and are controlled by the control plane. The data plane is composed of traditional infrastructure such as Reconfigurable Optical Add-Drop Multiplexers (ROADMs) and Transceivers (TRXs). Moreover, optical analyzers are strategically deployed at critical network points to directly capture and quantify changes in the SOP of transmitted light. These optical analyzers operate as inline devices in the transmission path, collecting SOP data and converting it into Numerical Polarization State Variation (NPSV) data that characterizes different events which affect the transmission line. The generated NPSV data is transferred to the control plane in addition to traditional Quality of Transmission (QoT) monitoring data from ROADMs and TRXs, and delivered to a centralized Network Management System (NMS) for detailed analysis. Although the envisioned framework relays additional information from ROADMs and TRXs to the NMS, only the Stokes parameters (obtained from the optical analyzer) are considered in our experimental validation. However, in principle, additional QoT metrics such as measured loss due to bending can also be analyzed. This loss can be evaluated end-to-end or at intermediate ROADMs along a path, and can serve as an indication of the segment where the loss or bending occurred.
At the NMS, an ML-based monitoring system (referred to as DL analysis in the figure) processes the collected data to derive actionable insights for network management and security. Pre-processing techniques, such as normalization and standardization, are applied to ensure compatibility of the data with ML algorithms and to enhance the precision of the analysis. While Unsupervised Learning (USL) and Semi-supervised Learning (SSL) are useful for detecting abnormal patterns and emerging threat types, their lack of precision and limitation in distinguishing exact attack types often limits their applicability. To maintain network reliability and security, it is crucial to differentiate between benign events, such as those caused by routine vibrations, and malicious activities, such as eavesdropping attempts aimed at intercepting data or physical threats like fiber cuts resulting from sabotage or excavation. The current framework emphasizes DL techniques, which excel in detecting and classifying specific event categories, providing actionable insights and enhancing

Fig. 2. Field fiber routes in the OpenIreland testbed: a 300 m section between two TCD locations and a 21 km section linking TCD to DCU, both in loop back configuration.
network monitoring efficiency. In [29], we demonstrated robust performance of traditional SL methods in detecting and classifying various events in real-world, noisy environments. Here, we extend our preliminary study by exploring the application of DL models for processing the SOP data collected in optical networks. By leveraging the DL capacity to handle high-dimensional inputs, we aim at improving the accuracy of event classification in real-world, noisy environments.
Ultimately, the anomalies detected by the ML models are conveyed to the NMS, which plays a central role in overseeing network health. The NMS analyzes the generated alerts, initiates appropriate responses, and ensures that the network remains secure and resilient against potential threats.
III. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
A. OpenIreland Testbed
The data used in our experiments is collected from the real-world fiber installation, a part of the OpenIreland testbed infrastructure at Trinity College Dublin (TCD) [30]. The testbed provides the ability to set up a large metro network and links TCD to different field fibers.
In this sensing experiment, we utilized two field-deployed fibers. Fig. 2 depicts the approximate routes of these fiber sections. These sections are subject to varying levels of environmental noise, which distinguishes them from a laboratory fiber spool that can be considered nearly noiseless. The fiber links consist of conventional Single Mode (SM) G.652 or G.657 cables. Both fibers are set up in a loop back, so that we can transmit and receive from the same location. The shorter section we considered (referred to as the short-link installation) consists

SADIGHI et al.: DEEP LEARNING FOR DETECTION OF HARMFUL EVENTS IN REAL-WORLD, NOISY OPTICAL FIBER DEPLOYMENTS

6095

Fig. 3. A schematic representation of the system utilized for the collection and analysis of SOP signatures. A linearly polarized laser source is coupled to a Polarization Maintaining (PM) fiber, which is connected to a Single Mode (SM) fiber conforming to the ITU-T G.652 transmission standard.
of a 150 m fiber path linking two OpenIreland locations within TCD, but traversing an external public road that is subject to external environmental effects. Since the optical signal is transmitted and received at the same location in the lab, the actual fiber length traversed is 300 m (round-trip).
Similarly, the longer section we considered (referred to as the long-link installation) consists of a fiber connection between TCD and Dublin City University (DCU) on the north side of Dublin. While the length of a one-way link between these sites is 10.5 km, the round-trip distance covered by the optical signal in our experimental setup is 21 km. This longer connection serves as a realistic representation of a metro network environment.
A looped fiber configuration primarily serves to emulate a longer transmission distance, allowing us to analyze the impact of noise and environmental disturbances over an extended fiber length. The key difference between a looped and a one-way transmission lies in the fact that the round-trip setup inherently collects more noise and polarization fluctuations compared to a single-trip scenario, as the signal traverses the fiber distance twice before reaching the receiver. Both installed sections consist of fiber optic cables housed in a protective liquid-filled tube within ducts. Based on our observations, we believe that the liquid facilitated the transfer of vibrations from external factors to the fibers, compared to empty ducts.
B. Data Collection Process
To collect and analyze signatures generated by various events that affect the short- (300 m) and long-link (21 km) installations, we designed a scheme as illustrated in Fig. 3. We use a linearly polarized Continuous Wave Distributed Feedback (DFB) laser capable of transmitting an optical signal that occupies one of the available wavelengths in the O, E, S, C, or L band. This laser source is controlled by a driver, ensuring stable optical power output for transmission. The emitted light is coupled to a Polarization Maintaining (PM) fiber connected to a G.652 SM fiber, where mechanical vibrations induce variations in the SOP. The laser source is set at 1310 nm wavelength and its spectral width was 0.5 nm, measured at a level where the optical power drops to 20 dB below the peak power at the center wavelength. This optical signal is sent through a PM fiber and injected into the installed network. The launch optical power is approximately

-16 dBm and adjusted so that the optical analyzer receives power around -22 dBm. The results obtained with this configuration demonstrates a significantly improved signal to noise ratio (SNR) compared to the datasets reported in [29]. This improvement is primarily attributed to the reduced output power of the laser, which minimized back-reflected light caused by connector reflections and Rayleigh scattering. Consequently, the laser exhibited enhanced polarization stability.
The transmission line is affected by mechanical vibrations arising from harmless activities such as traffic or operational fans, as well as harmful events, including excavation, sabotage, or eavesdropping attempts. Each action can introduce measurable changes in the SOP of the transmitted light. Intentional disturbances are imposed at the beginning or at the end of the transmission line. The sampling time is set to 0.5 ms, resulting in a Nyquist sampling rate of 1 kHz.
The optical analyzer is responsible for quantifying changes in the SOP and generating characteristic patterns that encapsulate the behavior of each action over the installed network, referred to in this paper as SOP signatures. First, for each specific event, the Stokes parameters (S1, S2, S3) are measured and mapped on the Poincaré sphere. S0 was excluded from our analysis as it does not affect the polarization variation. Then, the sampling process with the sampling time of 0.5ms spans over a 20-minute recording period for each event, resulting in a total of 2.4 million samples per event. Changes in the SOP are quantified by calculating the numerical distance between the SOP values at two consecutive sampling positions, forming the NPSV as follows:
NPSVt = (S1(t))2 + (S2(t))2 + (S3(t))2 (1)
where Si = Si(t) - Si(t - 1). Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) with hamming window [31] and 512 frequency bins is then applied to concatenated 0.5 ms NPSV data segments (time slots) of 500 elements each (i.e., equivalent to 250 ms) to convert the NPSV data from the time domain to the frequency domain. The resulting power spectrum dataset comprises 4,800 time slots (rows) and 512 frequency bins (columns). The collected signatures provide a detailed characterization of the polarization dynamics associated with each event type. The distinct signatures derived from each event type serve as the input for our ML algorithms designed to classify potential anomalies within the network.
C. Collected Signatures
This study involved the collection of seven distinct signatures for each of the fiber installations. Tables I and II summarize the signatures collected for the short- and the long-link installation, respectively.
Two types of normal fiber events are considered: relaxed (rlx) and soft bending (sbd). The rlx event represents the baseline scenario, where only routine background noise is recorded, i.e., no external intentional disturbances like eavesdropping, vibrations, or bending affect either short- (rlx_short) or long-link (rlx_long) fiber installations. The sbd event involves slight bending of the cable to simulate scenarios encountered during routine handling and maintenance of fiber installations, such as within patch

6096

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 43, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2025

TABLE I COLLECTED SIGNATURES FOR SHORT-LINK INSTALLATION
TABLE II COLLECTED SIGNATURES FOR LONG-LINK INSTALLATION
panels or during cable routing. To simulate real-life handling of patch panel cables by data center personnel, we define the sbd event as handling the cable manually by bending it to a radius of approximately 2 cm. This bending was performed repeatedly with a time period of approximately 10 seconds to reflect realistic conditions. This approach ensures that the experiment accurately captures the effects of minor physical interactions typically encountered during routine maintenance and cable management in fiber installations. Capturing signatures from this type of event for both short- (sbd_short) and long-link (sbd_long) installations helps to categorize such routine handling apart from malicious fiber bending.
One of the main purposes of this paper is to detect harmful and non-harmful mechanical vibrations acting on the fiber installation. Potentially harmful vibrations, such as those caused by an excavator operating close to an optical fiber, represent a significant threat. Excavators typically produce mechanical vibrations with a frequency spectrum centered around 80 Hz. This frequency is directly related to the rotational speed of the engine, measured in Revolutions Per Minute (RPM). To convert RPM to frequency in hertz (Hz), the value is divided by 60, as there are 60 seconds in a minute. For instance, an excavator operating close to the optical fiber installation poses risk of accidentally cutting the cable and disrupting the traffic. The engine of an excavator normally runsat 4800 RPM, generating

an 80 Hz vibration. By detecting this base tone, we can predict that an excavator is operating close to the fiber cable installation, and the network manager can take appropriate action to prevent a cable cut. For this study, 80 Hz vibrations were simulated using a loudspeaker placed 2 to 4 cm from the optical cable at a volume of 60 dBA to model the mechanical wave induced by an excavator. This magnitude, equivalent to the volume of normal conversational speech and very likely to be exceeded by an excavator operating near fiber installation, serves as a conservative, worst-case scenario for testing the system's sensitivity. We collected potential harmful vibration signatures for the shorter (80vb_short) and the longer link (80vb_long). When generating these two signatures, the distance between the laser and the external vibration sources was between two and three meters, which means that the signal affected by the imposed vibration traversed the full transmission distance and was simultaneously subject to external factors such as vibrations and noise coming from the real-world deployment.
For the short-link installation, the signature dtc_80vb_short corresponds to the case where the source of the 80 Hz vibration is placed just before the detector. The shld_80vb_short signature represents an 80 Hz vibration event simulated in the presence of a protective shield covering the fiber. This setup allows us to evaluate if the DL models are able to classify events even with the shield's ability to dampen or filter out harmful vibrations. In contrast, non-harmful vibrations often originate from benign sources, such as traffic-induced vibrations transmitted through the ground or other infrastructure. Recording all potential nonharmful vibration types in real-life scenarios is a complex endeavor. Therefore, this study focuses on a 155 Hz vibration as a representative case for normal, benign activity, such as the vibrations generated by a fan operating at approximately 9,000 RPM. The 80vb_155vb_long signature represents the combined effect of harmful and non-harmful vibrations on the long-link fiber, enabling us to evaluate the ability of DL models to classify overlapping events. In comparison, the shld_80vb_155vb_long signature simulates the impact of shielding on the fiber installation under the same conditions.
To simulate malicious eavesdropping, this study models an eavesdropper breaching the outer layers of the fiber cable and bending the internal fiber at a radius of 4 mm and a 25 angle as described in [32]. We consider an eavesdropping device with 3% coupling efficiency and 0.3 dB attenuation, which is difficult to detect using power threshold methods without generating excessive false alarms. Further details on the implications of different bending angles, coupling efficiencies, and attenuation of eavesdropping devices on the overall eavesdropping feasibility can be found in [32]. We consider two types of eavesdropping: continuous and bursty. The eav_short signature corresponds to the shorter link scenario where eavesdropping is carried out in short bursts of 10 s duration, with relaxing 20 s periods in between, simulating a scenario where an attacker intermittently attempts to extract optical signals. The eav_80vb_155vb_short signature, on the other hand, refers to a constant eavesdropping event without relaxing periods. This event overlaps with vibrations at 80 Hz and 155 Hz. By introducing periodic interruptions, we assess the ML model's ability to detect and classify

SADIGHI et al.: DEEP LEARNING FOR DETECTION OF HARMFUL EVENTS IN REAL-WORLD, NOISY OPTICAL FIBER DEPLOYMENTS

6097

both transient and continuous eavesdropping attempts, ensuring its robustness in practical deployment scenarios. Combining the two types of overlapping vibrations simulates a real-world scenario where eavesdropping and mechanical disturbances simultaneously affect the fiber. The eav_long signature represents an eavesdropping event occurring at the long-link installation, where the eavesdropping is continuous without short bursts. Analogously, the eav_80vb_155vb_long signature models a similar eavesdropping event on the long-link fiber installation, where both 80 Hz and 155 Hz vibrations are present.
D. Data Pre-Processing
The pre-processing pipeline for the dataset was designed to ensure efficiency and compatibility with our DL framework. The same data pre-processing approach was applied on both the short- and the long-link dataset. As discussed in Sec. III-B, each dataset contains 4,800 data points (samples) from each signature, i.e., a total of 33,600 data points per dataset. Each sample represents 0.5 ms of SOP changes characterized by 512 frequency bins (features). The dataset is randomly split into balanced training, validation, and testing sets with an 80-10-10 split ratio. The resulting splits consist of 26,880 samples for training, 3,360 samples for validation, and 3,360 samples for testing. A Z-score normalization technique is applied to scale the data to a uniform range. Additionally, the target labels are one-hot encoded, representing seven distinct classes.
IV. DEEP LEARNING MODELS
A. Model Architectures
Our proposed architecture for the classification task in shortand long-link installations integrates convolutional layers followed by fully-connected dense layers for effective sequence classification. The model architecture begins with a 1D convolutional layer, which is designed to learn and extract meaningful patterns or relationships from the sequential order of the input data. This CNN is followed by a max-pooling layer to reduce spatial dimensionality, accompanied by batch normalization to enhance training stability and dropout layers to prevent overfitting. Subsequently, the output of the CNN is flattened and passed through a series of N fully connected dense layers. These dense layers are followed by batch normalization and dropout layers. Finally, the output of the dense layers is passed through a softmax activation function in the output layer, producing a 7-class probability distribution for classification.
B. Hyper-Parameter Tuning Algorithm and Setup
To improve the performance of the DL models, a hyperparameter tuning process was implemented using the random search method of the Keras Tuner framework, aimed at exploring the best model architecture. The output of the hyper-parameter tuning process allows us to select a model that balances model complexity and classification accuracy in both short and longlink installations. For the initial convolutional layer, various hyper-parameters were adjusted for enhanced feature extraction. The number of filters in the CNN ranged from 2 to 8, enabling

the model to capture diverse patterns at different levels of complexity. For the kernel size, which determines how many consecutive data points the model convolves at once, the considered range was {3, 5, 7}. Several activation functions, including {relu, swish, tanh, elu} were tested so that the CNN could effectively capture nonlinear patterns in the data. The pooling size was selected from {2, 3}, and dropout rates were tuned in the range of [0.1, 0.5] with a step size of 0.05.
The flattened output of the last convolutional layer was passed through fully-connected dense layers. We varied the number of these dense layers (N ) from 4 to 7 to assess the trade-offs between model complexity and performance. The number of units in these layers was varied between 64 and 2048. Additionally, various activation functions, such as {relu, swish, tanh, elu, selu, gelu}, were examined for the dense layers. To prevent overfitting, dropout rates between these dense layers were tuned in the range [0, 0.7] with a step size of 0.05.
The optimizer plays a critical role in determining how effectively it converges to a local minimum during training. We tested five popular optimizers ­ Adam, SGD, RMSprop, Adadelta, and Adagrad ­ with the learning rate as a key hyper-parameter. The learning rates for each optimizer were sampled from a log scale ranging from 1 × 10-6 to 1 × 10-2, to accommodate the dynamic range often necessary for effective training. Since in this work we tackle a multi-class classification problem, we adopt the cross-entropy loss function.
For each dataset comprised of data from the short- or long-link installation, we allow the Keras Tuner framework to train and evaluate 100 realizations of the CNN. Each realization was trained for up to 200 epochs, with training guided by an early stopping criterion. Specifically, training stopped if the validation loss did not improve for 30 consecutive epochs, and the best model (comprised of architecture, weights and biases) were stored. We recorded the loss and accuracy for the training and validation dataset across the epochs and selected the model that showed the highest validation accuracy at the end of training.
V. RESULTS
In this section, we present the performance results of the DL models tested over the collected datasets. We first discuss the results of the hyper-parameter tuning step. Then, we analyze the performance of the best models found.
A. Tuned Hyper-Parameters
The hyper-parameters of the models were optimized using the RandomSearch method of the Keras Tuner framework, targeting validation accuracy as the optimization objective. A total of 100 trials were conducted. The best model configuration was selected based on the highest validation accuracy achieved by the model after training with a particular set of hyper-parameter values. The hyper-parameter values that achieved the best accuracy for the short- and long-link installations are summarized in Table III.
The selected models exhibit unique configurations adapted to the complexity of their respective datasets. Both models consist of a 1D convolutional layer, followed by 7 fully-connected dense

6098
TABLE III HYPER-PARAMETER VALUES FOR THE BEST MODELS

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 43, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2025

layers. For the short-link installation, the model utilizes a slightly higher number of filters (8) in the convolutional layer, while the long-link installation requires a reduced number of filters (6). This difference highlights the need for greater feature extraction capacity in the short-link case, where a lower level of background noise in the signals requires the model to exploit finer details. Additionally, the activation functions differ between the two models, with tanh proving more effective for the short-link installation and swish yielding superior performance for the long-link case. The dropout rates were also tuned independently for each layer, with higher regularization applied to the convolutional layer in the long-link case (0.5). This adjustment suggests a greater need to prevent overfitting due to the increased complexity and noise of the long-link dataset. The disparity in model complexity between the short- and long-link installations is reflected in the total number of trainable parameters. The short-link model contains approximately 7.98 million parameters, while the long-link model requires over 15.8 million. This increase underscores the greater challenge of accurate event classification for the long-link installation, attributed to higher environmental noise and data variability over the 21 km transmission distance.
Fig. 4 shows the validation accuracy (the percentage of correctly classified samples out of the total number of samples) versus model complexity (measured in terms of the number of trainable parameters) for the 100 realizations of DL models during fine-tuning on the short- and long-link installations. The figure highlights differing requirements for the two considered scenarios. Most of the models tested for the short-link installation shown in Fig. 4(a) achieve accuracy above 0.9, with many models approaching perfect accuracy. Fig. 4(b) shows that, for the long-link case, many models fall below 0.9 accuracy. This indicates that the long-link dataset is more challenging. The higher complexity of the longer-link case is corroborated by the fact that the best model for the shorter link is approximately

Fig. 4. Validation accuracy vs. model complexity (in terms of millions of trainable parameters) for the 100 hyper-parameter tuning realizations.
half as complex as the best model for the longer link (around 7.5 M vs. around 16 M, respectively).
The model with the worst performance for the short link in Fig. 4(a) achieves an accuracy of 0.29, while the worst model for the longer link in Fig. 4(b) achieves 0.68 accuracy. Interpreting the exact performance values for the worst models is not relevant, since this value is controlled by the random nature of the trainable parameters initialization, and the random hyper-parameter search. On the other hand, it is important to observe that the random search hyper-parameter tuning obtains only a few poorly-performing models, while most of the models perform closely to the best one. This means that the hyperparameter tuning algorithm is able to quickly find architectures that yield good performance.
Fig. 4 also shows that the most complex models are not always able to achieve the highest accuracy. Interestingly, as shown in Fig. 4(a), the worst model for the short-link installation has higher complexity than the best model. In summary, the behavior revealed by Fig. 4 shows that a thorough hyper-parameter tuning campaign is needed in these scenarios due to the large variations in performance. It also shows that one-size-fits-all architectures

SADIGHI et al.: DEEP LEARNING FOR DETECTION OF HARMFUL EVENTS IN REAL-WORLD, NOISY OPTICAL FIBER DEPLOYMENTS
TABLE IV ACCURACY OF THE BEST MODELS OVER THE TRAINING,
VALIDATION, AND TESTING SETS

6099

are not suitable if the goal is to achieve the highest performance possible for individual scenarios such as those considered in this paper.

B. Performance Analysis
In this section, we analyze the performance of the best DL models for the short- and long-link installations found during the hyper-parameter tuning stage. The evaluation is based on the accuracy metric, followed by an analysis of confusion matrices.
Table IV summarizes the accuracy results. These results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed DL models, achieving high classification accuracy across training, validation, and testing sets for both scenarios. Notably, the model applied to short-link data outperformed the long-link model, achieving an accuracy over the testing set of 98.57% compared to 92.26% for the long-link installation. The results also make it evident that the classification of events over fibers across populated areas becomes increasingly challenging with the distance that they span.
Fig. 5(a) shows the confusion matrix for the short-link scenario for the testing dataset. It allows us to analyze exactly which classes are affected by inaccuracies. The model has high classification performance in this dataset, with most events identified correctly, and a low misclassification rate. The model achieved perfect classification for the normal operating condition signature (rlx_short). This means that the model presented no false positives (see the first line of the matrix). The confusion matrix also shows that this model presented a small false positive rate of 0.22% (see the first column of the matrix). Similarly, the 80vb_short, dtc_80vb_short, and shld_80vb_short events were accurately classified, achieving accuracy of 100%, 99.59%, and 99.59%, respectively. The confusion matrix results for 80vb_short and dtc_80vb_short show that the vibration insertion point does not influence the classification of the 80 Hz vibration signature, i.e., it does not matter significantly whether the vibration source is close to or far from the optical analyzer. For the overlapping event of eavesdropping with dual-frequency vibration denoted as eav_80vb_155vb_short, the model accurately detects this malicious event with 0.41% misclassification as a soft bending event. For sbd_short, 95.03% of the samples were identified correctly, with minor confusion observed primarily with eav_short (1.94%), eav_80vb_155vb_short (2.81%), and rlx_short (0.22%). Similarly, the eav_short signature achieved 94.55% accuracy, with some misclassification into event categories like sbd_short (3.77%), eav_80vb_155vb_short (1.68%). These results highlight that our model performs well detecting constant eavesdropping.
Fig. 5(b) shows the confusion matrix for the long-link scenario for the testing dataset. We can observe that the model achieved

Fig. 5. Confusion matrices of the best models.
high classification accuracy for several events, indicating a significant improvement of the results previously reported in [29] handling real-world noisy scenarios. The model classified the normal operating condition (rlx_long) with 95.30% accuracy. This means that the model showed a 4.70% false positive rate, with most of the false positives (2.78%) classified as eav_long (see the first row of the matrix). The 80vb_long event was detected with perfect accuracy, confirming the model's ability to reliably identify critical threats. Similarly, the overlapping event identified as shld_80vb_155vb_long was classified with 99.38% accuracy, indicating that the model is able to achieve good accuracy even with the presence of a shield which reduces the effects of harmful vibrations on the SOP signature. However, for the soft bending and eavesdropping events (sbd_long and eav_long), the model faced challenges, with accuracies of 90.50% and 71.28%,

6100

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 43, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2025

respectively. Misclassifications of soft bending (sbd_long) occurred primarily as eav_long (6.70%), eav_80vb_155vb_long (1.73%), rlx_long (0.86%), and 80vb_155vb_long (0.22%). These results suggest that the model has difficulties in distinguishing among these classes, possibly due to subtle overlaps in SOP variations between these events. For eav_long, the model showed rather high confusion with rlx_long (15.93%), sbd_long (9.22%), eav_80vb_155vb_long (1.89%), and 80vb_155vb_long (1.68%), reflecting the complexity of accurately detecting inconstant malicious eavesdropping in noisy environments. The overlapping event eav_80vb_155vb_long was detected with 97.76% accuracy, with minimal misclassification into categories such as shld_80vb_155vb_long (0.41%), 80vb_155vb_long (0.41%), sbd_long (0.41%), and eav_long (0.81%). The 80vb_155vb_long event itself achieved a lower accuracy of 94.02%, with the majority of misclassifications occurring as rlx_long (2.27%) and eav_long (2.47%).
VI. CONCLUSION
In this study, we proposed and evaluated DL models for event classification in short- and long-link fiber-optic installations. An extensive hyper-parameter tuning approach using the Keras Tuner framework identified the best model configurations tailored to the unique challenges posed by each installation type. The results demonstrated that our models achieve high classification accuracy, with notable performance differences between the short- and long-link scenarios due to variations in noise levels and data complexity.
For the short-link installation, the best DL model achieved a testing accuracy of 98.57%, highlighting its ability to effectively classify events in low-noise environments. This performance underscores the suitability of the proposed architecture for scenarios in which the fiber spans shorter distances and experiences less environmental interference. In contrast, the long-link installation presented a more challenging classification problem.The best model for this scenario achieved a testing accuracy of 92.26%, indicating a strong but comparatively poorer performance. These results highlight the need for more robust techniques to address the complexities of long-link installations in noisy environments.
For both installations, the models performed well in detecting critical events such as eavesdropping and vibrations, which are vital for ensuring the security and reliability of optical communication systems. The hyper-parameter tuning revealed that a one-size-fits-all approach does not yield the best accuracy results for the use case analyzed in this paper. On the contrary, the best accuracy for each installation is achieved by models with different architectures. The analysis also showed that complexity does not directly translate to accuracy, and the best models were not the ones with the highest complexity. Finally, the performance gap between short-link and long-link installations suggests that future work should explore advanced techniques, such as hybrid architectures, to further enhance classification accuracy, particularly for long-link scenarios.

REFERENCES
[1] A. Schulte, "Fiber broadband," Accessed: Jan. 5, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://fiberbroadband.org/2022/01/05/fiber-broadbandenters-largest-investment-cycle-ever/
[2] T. Bergur, "Fiber internet penetration rate in households in Sweden 2010-2020," Accessed: Dec. 19, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.statista.com/statistics/598248/fiber-internet-penetrationrate-in-households-in-sweden/
[3] Neos Networks, "What is a backbone network?" Accessed: Mar. 24, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://neosnetworks.com/resources/blog/what-isbackbone-network/?utm_source=chatgpt.com
[4] A. Harris and P. Castle, "Bend loss measurements on high numerical aperture single-mode fibers as a function of wavelength and bend radius," J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 34­40, Jan. 1986.
[5] M. Z. Iqbal, H. Fathallah, and N. Belhadj, "Optical fiber tapping: Methods and precautions," in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. High-Capacity Opt. Netw. Emerg. Technol., 2011, pp. 164­168.
[6] C. Pendăo and I. Silva, "Optical fiber sensors and sensing networks: Overview of the main principles and applications," Sensors, vol. 22, no. 19, 2022, Art. no. 7554.
[7] G. Marra et al., "Optical interferometry-based array of seafloor environmental sensors using a transoceanic submarine cable," Science, vol. 376, no. 6595, pp. 874­879, 2022.
[8] S. Rerucha et al., "Compact interferometric displacement gauge with subnanometer resolution and milimeter range," in Proc. IEEE Sensors, 2016, pp. 1­3.
[9] D. Grassani, M. Galli, and D. Bajoni, "Active stabilization of a michelson interferometer at an arbitrary phase with subnanometer resolution," Opt. Lett., vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 2530­2533, Apr. 2014.
[10] Q. Bai et al., "Recent advances in Brillouin optical time domain reflectometry," Sensors, vol. 19, no. 8, 2019, Art. no. 1862.
[11] G. Wang, Z. Pang, F. Wang, Y. Chen, H. Dai, and B. Wang, "Urban fiber based laser interferometry for traffic monitoring and analysis," J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 347­354, Jan. 2023.
[12] L. B. Liokumovich, N. A. Ushakov, O. I. Kotov, M. A. Bisyarin, and A. H. Hartog, "Fundamentals of optical fiber sensing schemes based on coherent optical time domain reflectometry: Signal model under static fiber conditions," J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 33, no. 17, pp. 3660­3671, Sep. 2015.
[13] B. Dong et al., "Real-time and post-hoc compression for data from distributed acoustic sensing," Comput. Geosci., vol. 166, 2022, Art. no. 105181.
[14] B. Wang, D. Ba, Q. Chu, L. Qiu, D. Zhou, and Y. Dong, "High-sensitivity distributed dynamic strain sensing by combining rayleigh and Brillouin scattering," Opto- Electron. Adv., vol. 3, no. 12, pp. 200013­1, 2020.
[15] Z. Wang, B. Lu, Q. Ye, and H. Cai, "Recent progress in distributed fiber acoustic sensing with -OTDR," Sensors, vol. 20, no. 22, 2020, Art. no. 6594.
[16] A. Masoudi, T. Lee, M. Beresna, and G. Brambilla, "10-cm spatial resolution distributed acoustic sensor based on an ultra low-loss enhanced backscattering fiber," Opt. Continuum, vol. 1, no. 9, pp. 2002­2010, 2022.
[17] L. Shen, W. Yu, R. Xu, Y. Wang, and B. Du, "Co-propagation of distributed acoustic sensing in the l-band and 100-Gb/s WDM coherent communication systems," in Proc. Asia Commun. Photon. Conf., 2022, pp. 629­632.
[18] J. K. Brenne et al., "Non-intrusive das coexisting in telecom networks," presented at Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. Exhib., San Diego, CA, USA, Mar. 24­28, 2024, Paper M4E.3.
[19] J. Pesic, E. Le Rouzic, N. Brochier, and L. Dupont, "Proactive restoration of optical links based on the classification of events," in Proc. 15th Int. Conf. Opt. Netw. Des. Model., 2011, pp. 1­6.
[20] W. H. McMaster, "Polarization and the stokes parameters," Amer. J. Phys., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 351­362, 1954.
[21] C. J. Carver and X. Zhou, "Polarization sensing of network health and seismic activity over a live terrestrial fiber-optic cable," Commun. Eng., vol. 3, no. 1, 2024, Art. no. 91.
[22] D. Rafique, T. Szyrkowiec, H. Grießer, A. Autenrieth, and J.-P. Elbers, "Cognitive assurance architecture for optical network fault management," J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 1443­1450, Apr. 2018.
[23] K. Abdelli, M. Lonardi, J. Gripp, S. Olsson, F. Boitier, and P. Layec, "Risky event classification leveraging transfer learning for very limited datasets in optical networks," J. Opt. Commun. Netw., vol. 16, no. 7, pp. C51­C68, Jul. 2024.

SADIGHI et al.: DEEP LEARNING FOR DETECTION OF HARMFUL EVENTS IN REAL-WORLD, NOISY OPTICAL FIBER DEPLOYMENTS

6101

[24] L. Sadighi, S. Karlsson, C. Natalino, and M. Furdek, "Machine learningbased polarization signature analysis for detection and categorization of eavesdropping and harmful events," in Proc. Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf., 2024, pp. 1­3.
[25] L. Sadighi, S. Karlsson, L. Wosinska, and M. Furdek, "Machine learning analysis of polarization signatures for distinguishing harmful from nonharmful fiber events," in Proc. 24th Int. Conf. Transp. Opt. Netw. Conf., 2024, pp. 1­5.
[26] D. Rutigliano, G. Boracchi, P. Invernizzi, E. Sozio, C. Alippi, and S. Binetti, "Event-detection deep neural network for OTDR trace analysis," in Proc. Int. Conf. Eng. Appl. Neural Netw., Springer, 2021, pp. 190­201.
[27] Z. Ge, H. Wu, C. Zhao, and M. Tang, "High-accuracy event classification of distributed optical fiber vibration sensing based on time­space analysis," Sensors, vol. 22, no. 5, 2022, Art. no. 2053.
[28] K. Abdelli, H. Griesser, and S. Pachnicke, "Convolutional neural networks for reflective event detection and characterization in fiber optical links given noisy OTDR signals," in Proc. Photonic Netw.; 22th ITG Symp., 2021, pp. 1­5.

[29] L. Sadighi, S. Karlsson, C. Natalino, L. Wosinska, M. Ruffini, and M. Furdek, "Detection and classification of eavesdropping and mechanical vibrations in fiber optical networks by analyzing polarization signatures over noisy environments," in Proc. 50th Eur. Conf. Opt. Commun. Conf., 2024, pp. 527­530.
[30] CONNECT Centre for Future Networks and Communications, "Open Ireland testbed," (n.d.). [Online]. Available: https://connectcentre.ie/news/ launch-of-open-ireland-e2-million-open-networking-testbed/
[31] P. Podder, T. Z. Khan, M. H. Khan, and M. M. Rahman, "Comparative performance analysis of hamming, hanning and blackman window," Int. J. Comput. Appl., vol. 96, pp. 1­7, 2014.
[32] S. Karlsson, R. Lin, L. Wosinska, and P. Monti, "Eavesdropping G. 652 vs. G. 657 fibres: A performance comparison," in Proc. Int. Conf. Opt. Netw. Des. Model., 2022, pp. 1­3.

